Lecturer’s name:   
 Date:  
 Course: ELA 6 
 Unit 4: Analyzing and Crafting Argumentative Texts 
 Unit Duration: 25 days 
 Lesson Duration: 45- 60 minutes 
 TEKS: 
 6.6C: Use text evidence to support an appropriate response. 
 6.6I: Reflect on and adjust responses as new evidence is presented. 
 Lesson Part # 

 Topic: Supporting my opinion with evidence 
 Lesson objectives:   
 SWBAT cite text evidence to support a response. 
 SWBAT adjust response as new evidence is presented. 
 Essential Questions:   
 How do I form an opinion? 
 Why is it necessary to support my opinion with facts? 
   LYS Methodology 
 Be (Character/Values/Principles) - Vocational- Resourcefulness 
 Know (What resources are available to the student/ How can they use them) - Social- set boundaries 
 Do (Execute with Excellence) - Educational- Skill Development 
 Resources (Include Technology): 
 Docs Handout: https://docs.google.com/document/d/17nHpkMBoi5F3fsxnS2ervOyyY_AyAx8BFg9vjWxCad8/edit 
 Teacher selects a question for students to research and form an opinion on. 
 Teachers can pre-select and share resources for student research or outline research parameters/ guidelines for students to determine their own sources. 
 Suggested Resource 
 Britannica, ProCon: https://www.procon.org/ 
 KidzWorld, The Pros and Cons of Homework: https://www.kidzworld.com/article/29686-the-pros-and-cons-of-homework/ 
 Junior Scholastic Debates: https://junior.scholastic.com/pages/topics/debate.html?page=1 
 Instructional Input - Asynchronous 
 A S: Anticipatory Set (Introduction) 
 Teacher provides a question and students brainstorm reasons both FOR and AGAINST the question. 
 If possible, provide a chat board or other area where students can share their ideas and read and respond to the ideas of other students. 
 State the purpose: Good writers use facts to support their opinions. Today, we will read and analyze sources in order to gather evidence and present our opinions on this same question. 
 M: Modeling (I do) 
 Use an article and model for students how to cite text evidence. Include a sentence starter that reveals the source, “According to the Pew Research survey, ___”. Work together to gather one piece of evidence that supports each side of the argument. 
 Guide students to record the source information for the modeled text. 
 Citation Tutorial found here: https://libguides.bc.edu/citation-tutorial/record 
 GP: Guided Practice (We do) 
 Students work in small groups or individually to continue gathering evidence from the sources. Students correctly cite the information and record source information for 2-4 sources. 
 Provide a checklist or clear directions on how students can check that their work and sources are cited correctly. 
 Instructional Input - Synchronous 
 AS: Anticipatory Set (Introduction) 
 Teacher provides a question and students brainstorm reasons both FOR and AGAINST the question. 
 Share out and record class responses. Encourage students to add new ideas to their list 
 State the purpose: Good writers use facts to support their opinions. Today, we will read and analyze sources in order to gather evidence and present our opinions on this same question. 
 M: Modeling (I do) 
 Use an article and model for students how to cite text evidence. Include a sentence starter that reveals the source, “According to the Pew Research survey, ___”. Work together to gather one piece of evidence that supports each side of the argument. 
 Guide students to record the source information for the modeled text. 
 Citation Tutorial found here: https://libguides.bc.edu/citation-tutorial/record 
 GP: Guided Practice (We do) 
 Students work in small groups or individually to continue gathering evidence from the sources. Students correctly cite the information and record source information for 2-4 sources. 
 As time permits, discuss evidence and support students in correctly citing evidence by stating the source. 
 Independent Practice/ Homework 
 Students use the gathered evidence to write a personal opinion that answers the question. A complete answer includes a clearly stated opinion, at least 3 pieces of evidence correctly cited, and clear explanations for each piece of evidence used. 
 Lesson Close 
 What is the answer to the essential question, and why does it matter to me in terms of:  
 Vocational- Resourcefulness 
 Social- set boundaries 
 Educational- Skill Development 

 Being resourceful means looking for information, resources, and support in places that others might not think of. In order to form a clear opinion that is supported by facts, it is necessary to be resourceful. When creating an argument or determining your stance, you should use as many credible sources as you can to help ensure you are fully educated and aware of the topic at hand and how it impacts you and others. This is a skill necessary in both work and life because being able to identify sources of information and use the information you have to make decisions allows you to be creative, productive, and a reliable worker. 
 Regardless of the opinion you hold, it is important to know that you have an opinion and that, likely, within that opinion you know there should be certain boundaries set. Consider the arguments that people make both for and against today’s topic and think about what we have learned about Source credibility and logical fallacies. When analyzing the evidence and reasons, are people setting boundaries for themselves or expecting others to set those boundaries. What does that mean for the evidence and reasons used to support one’s opinion? This is important to consider when forming your own opinion and analyzing the opinions of others. What is within a person’s control and how does the amount of control a person has or perceives they have impact someone’s opinion? Additionally, it is your job to set boundaries around what you will and won’t let affect you when it comes to those who disagree with your personal opinion. If someone pushes against you and asks questions, how will you respond? This is the importance of using credible facts, so that you know you have information that you agree with to support your own opinions. 
 Education is about developing new skills. Using technology is certainly an important way that we develop new skills. Skill development is about what you actually do. What you read, the questions you ask and listen to the answers, the way you respond to others and present your opinions. Skill development is about taking the facts in front of you and using that information to form new ideas and take new action. So, after you have gathered evidence and formed an opinion, the next question is- what are you going to do about it? Consider today’s question and ask yourself: it is time to look at your school or community policies and determine if they align with the research you have done and the claims you have stated. If they don’t, what can you do about it? You are not too young to take action. It can be argued that you are never too young to take action, so be sure to take your new learning and put it to use by pushing for change or supporting policies already in place. 

 This is the assignment page (below)!!! 

 Lesson 9.B 

 Student Name: Date: 
 Teacher Name: Period/Teacher: 

 : 

 Course 
 Unit 
 Content Objective: 
 Lesson Objective: 
 LYS Methodology 

 Assignment Instructions: 

 Essential Questions: 

 Lesson Close : 

 Accommodations/Modifications Provided On This Assignment: 

 Accommodation/Modification 
 Applied To This Assignment (Y/N) 
 Extra Time 

 Notes/Presentation Copy Provided 

 Study Sheet Provided 

 Graphic Organizer 

 Mnemonic devices 

 Larger Size Font 

 Shortened Text 

 Peer Support 

 Preferential Seating 

 Frequent On Task Reminders 

 Provided A Completed Example 

 Visual Organizer Provided
