Need Improvement 
 Acceptable 
 Accomplished 
 Distinguished 
 Lesson objectives:  

 Instructional goals and objectives are not stated. 

 Learners cannot tell what is expected of them. 

 Learners cannot determine what they should know and be able to do as a result of learning and instruction. 
 Instructional goals and objectives are stated but are not easy to understand. 

 Learners are given some information regarding what is expected of them. 

 Learners are not given enough information to determine what they should know and be able to do as a result of learning and instruction. 
 Instructional goals and objectives are stated 

 Learners have an understanding of what is expected of them. 

 Learners can determine what they should know and be able to do as a result of learning and instruction. 
 Instructional goals and objectives are clearly stated. 

 Learners have a clear understanding of what is expected of them. 

 Learners can determine what they should know and be able to do as a result of learning and instruction. 

 Objectives are aligned and logically sequenced to the lesson’s goal, providing relevant and enriching extensions of the lesson. 

 All activities materials in assessments are logically sequenced, relevant to student’s prior understanding and real-world applications, integrate and reinforce concepts from other disciplines, deepen understanding of unit and course objectives, appropriate for diverse learners. 
 Essential Questions:  

 The Essential Questions are not noted and/or may not be appropriate. 
 The Essential Questions are appropriate but may not align with the standards and objectives, or invite inquiry. 

 Questions may not require higher levels of thinking. 

 The Essential Questions are appropriate, thoroughly aligned with the standards and objectives, and designed to invite inquiry. 

 Questions require higher levels of thinking. 

 The essential questions are clearly stated appropriate, thoroughly aligned with the standards and objectives, and designed to invite inquiry. 

 Questions are creative, evaluative, or require an analysis level that requires a deeper learning and broader understanding of the objective of the lesson. 

 LYS Methodology 
 Be (Character/Values/Principles) -  
 Know (What resources are available to the student/ How can they use them) -  
 Do (Execute with Excellence) - 

 Few goals aligned to *LYS standards. Rarely provide time for LYS methodology and lesson close. 
 Most goals aligned to LYS standards 

 Activities/materials provide appropriate time for LYS methodology and lesson close. 
 All goals are aligned to LYS standards. 

 All activities/materials are relevant to all students. 

 All vertically aligned to state standards 
 All rigorous and measurable goals aligned to LYS standards. 

 All activities, materials are relevant to students prior understanding in real-world applications 

 All activities/ materials integrate and reinforce concepts from other disciplines 

 All activities/ materials provide appropriate time for student reflection 

 All activities/ materials deepen understanding of broader unit and course objectives 

 All activities/materials vertically aligned to state standards 

 Resources (Include Technology): 
 Selection and application of technologies is inappropriate (or nonexistent) for learning environment and outcomes 

 The selection and application of technologies are beginning to be appropriate for the learning environment and outcomes. 

 Technologies applied do not affect learning 
 The selection and application of technologies are appropriate for learning environments and outcomes. 

 Some technologies are applied to enhance learning. 

 Access to technological resources are readily available for all students 
 The selection and application of technologies are appropriate for the learning environment and outcomes. 

 Technologies applied to enhance learning. 

 Accesses to technological resources are readily available for all students and provide opportunities for students to establish high academic and social-emotional expectations for themselves. 
 Instructional Input 
 AS: Anticipatory Set (Introduction) 
 M: Modeling (I do) 
 GP: Guided Practice (We do) 

 Instructional strategies are missing other strategies used are inappropriate. Encourages little to no complex higher-order thinking, 
 Some instructional strategies are appropriate for learning outcome(s). 
 All students understanding their roles within instructional groups. 
 Most instructional strategies are appropriate for learning outcome(s). 

 Most strategies are based on a combination of practical experience, theory, research, and documented best practice. 
 All students understand their roles within instructional groups and facilitate opportunities for student input on goals and outcomes of activities. 

 Instructional strategies appropriate for learning outcome(s). Strategy based on a combination of practical experience, theory, research, and documented best practice. 
 Activities, resources, technology, and instructional materials that are all aligned to instructional purposes, are varied and appropriate to ability levels of students and actively engage them in ownership of their learning. 

 The ability of all students to set goals, reflect on, evaluate, and hold each other accountable within instructional groups. 
 Independent Practice/ Homework 

 Lesson Close 

 What is the answer to the essential question, and why does it matter to me in terms of:  
 Educational? 
 Social? 
 Cultural? 
 Financial? 
 Health? 
 Vocational? 
 Spiritual? 

 Closure limited or not connected to lesson objectives 

 Few activities that are sequenced and correlated to the standard 
 The stated closure activities bring the lesson to a close and align with the standards and objectives. 

 The closure may offer extensions and accommodations for student diversity. 
 Most activities are sequenced and correlated to the standard 
 The stated closure activities bring the lesson to an appropriate close, offer appropriate extensions, align with the standards and objectives, and accommodate for student diversity. 

 All activities/materials used for lesson close are relevant to students, and fit into the broader unit and course strand 
 All activities, materials for lesson close are relevant to students prior understanding in real-world applications, integrate and reinforce concepts from other disciplines, provide appropriate time for student work reflection and closure deepen understanding of unit and course objectives 

 All activities/materials for lesson close are vertically aligned to state standard., Integration of technology to enhance mastery of goals. 

 *LYS standards to be determined by IDS and Curriculum Specialist
