Lecturer’s name:   

 Date: 
 Course: Science 8 

 Duration: 
 Unit: 
 TEKS: TEKS 8.5 (A) 

 Lesson objectives:   

 By the end of the lesson, students will be able to demonstrate safe practices during laboratory and field investigations as outlined in TEA-approved safety standards; and practice appropriate use and conservation of resources, including disposal, reuse, or recycling of materials. 

 Students will use this knowledge to infer the quickest way to dissolve an Alka-Seltzer tablet. 
 Essential Questions:   

 What types of equipment would one find in the chemistry lab and how can they be used safely during laboratory and field investigations? 

 What are some steps you can take during a lab to prevent yourself from being lit on fire, poisoned, or blown up during a lab? 

 LYS Methodology 
 Be (Character/Values/Principles) - 
 Know (What resources are available to the student/ How can they use them) - 
 Do (Execute with Excellence) - 

 Be: What is self care? 

 Know: What are some strategies you can take to promote positive self care? 

 Do: What steps can you take to undertake positive acts of self care? 
 Resources(Include Technology): 
 Lesson Wide 
 Laptop 
 Projector 

 Instructional Input - Asynchronous 
 AS: Anticipatory Set (Introduction) 
 M: Modeling (I do) 

 GP: Guided Practice (We do) 

 As: Students will be asked to write a few sentences, up to a paragraph, about the types of laboratory equipment they might already be familiar with and what are some dangerous situations you can face in a lab. Students will upload their answers to the LMS. 

 M: Students will watch a video on the history of atomic knowledge. 

 GP: Students will play a game of Valence Electron Bingo. (Teacher will call out an element and students will have to use their periodic table to add the right number of valence electrons.) 

 Instructional Input - Synchronous 
 AS: Anticipatory Set (Introduction) 

 M: Modeling (I do) 

 GP: Guided Practice (We do) 

 As: Students will be asked to write a few sentences, up to a paragraph, about the types of laboratory equipment they might already be familiar with and what are some dangerous situations you can face in a lab. 

 M: Students will watch a video on valence electrons and chemical reactivity. 

 GP: Students will play a game of Valence Electron Bingo. (Teacher will call out an element and students will have to use their periodic table to add the right number of valence electrons.) 

 Independent Practice/ Homework 
 Students will finish their presentation 
 Lesson Close 

 What is the answer to the essential question, and why does it matter to me in terms of:  
 Educational? 
 Social? 
 Cultural? 
 Financial? 
 Health? 
 Vocational? 
 Spiritual? 

 Just as scientists aspire to learn more about the world around them, you too need something to aspire to. It can be as grandiose as curing cancer or it can be as simple as eating fewer cookies. The important thing is, what do you aspire to do? Whatever you aspire to be, you should aspire to do it the best way you can. 

 Just as Valence electrons give us clues as to the identity of an element, your identity is shaped by factors inside you. Your values, personality and behavior all contribute to your sense of identity. The question is, is it a good identity or bad identity?
