Here you go — copy from the line of dashes below all the way to the bottom. Each item has a plain-English explanation, why it matters, and a Your answer: line. Take your time.

LYS Cleanup Decisions — Working Doc
Last updated: May 3, 2026
For each item below, type one of:
YES — go ahead and do it
NO — leave it alone
LATER — good idea, not now
Or write your own note

SECTION A — Two pages doing the same job?
A1. Resources page vs Resource Library page
Plain English: Imagine your school library had two front doors, both labeled "Library," and you couldn't tell which one to use. That's what's happening here. There's a page at the address /resources (1,400 lines of code) AND another page at /resource-library (480 lines of code). Both list teaching materials. Either one is the "real" one and the other is leftover from an old version, OR they're meant for two different audiences and the labels are just confusing.
Why it matters: Two pages = double the bugs to fix, double the work when you change something, and confused users who don't know which link to click.
What I need from you: Open both pages in your browser (/resources and /resource-library) and tell me which one is the "real" one. Or if both are real, what's the difference supposed to be?
Your answer: These are two distinctly different things. The Resources Page is for students, parents, and counselors/educators to have college readiness resources. 
The resource library is for parents/homeschooling parents, and educators to have resources for lessons that they create or to influence planning.
Do not make any changes here.

A2. Lesson Generator vs Lesson Authoring
Plain English: Two pages can both create lessons. The "Generator" (2,166 lines) seems to be the AI-helps-you-write-a-lesson tool for regular teachers. The "Authoring" page (1,709 lines) seems to be for admins making official, polished "master" lessons that everyone else copies from. They save into different filing cabinets in the database.
Why it matters: If they really are two different tools (teacher quick draft vs. admin gold standard), keep both. If they're the same thing in two outfits, merge them.
My take: Probably keep both, but worth confirming.
Your answer: _You are right, these are two separate things that do the function as you described. So do not make any changes here.__________________________________________

A3. Three admin dashboards: System Admin, Site Admin, District Admin
Plain English: You have three control panels. System Admin is for you (the top boss, 5,692 lines). Site Admin is for one school's principal (3,079 lines). District Admin is for a multi-school superintendent (1,710 lines). All three have user lists, audit logs (who did what when), and content review queues. The architect noticed that big chunks of code are literally copy-pasted between them — same buttons, same tables, same logic, three times over.
Why it matters: When you fix a bug or add a button, you have to do it three times. And if you forget one, the three dashboards drift apart and start showing different things.
The fix isn't to delete two of them (the three permission levels are real) — the fix is to pull out the shared pieces (the user-list table, the audit-log viewer) into reusable building blocks that all three dashboards use.
Your answer: Yes. Good catch. We need to pull out the shared pieces (the user-list table, the audit-log viewer, and others as needed) into reusable building blocks that all three dashboards use. That way as the data changes, they can be seen up the chain, but not down the chain. So the System admin can “see/view” the down-line actions, but not necessarily make changes. To make changes, there should be a permission tool where the downline user grants upline permission to make edits, but not to view. 

A4. Onboarding spread across three places
Plain English: When a new user signs up, three different pieces of code work together to walk them through setup: (1) the Onboarding page itself, (2) a "tour" pop-up component, and (3) a "you haven't finished onboarding yet" reminder banner. The problem is that the answer to "is this user fully onboarded?" is stored in three different places — the user account, an in-app guard, and the browser's local storage. They can disagree.
Why it matters: A user might finish onboarding but the banner still nags them, or skip onboarding but the system thinks they're done. Hard-to-reproduce bugs.
The fix: Pick one source of truth (probably the user account in the database) and make the other two read from it.
Your answer: You are right, we need one source of truth. Which is the best one? I think that getting the user account fully setup is the most important

A5. Needs Analyzer page + component + modal
Plain English: There's a "Needs Analyzer" tool. It exists three places: a full-page version, a pop-up version (modal), and a shared component that both versions use. This is actually how it should be — write the tool once, show it as a page OR a pop-up depending on where the user is. Not redundant.
My take: Leave alone. It's correct.
Your answer: No. We need the need analyzer embedded in the onboarding process, and anytime a user “feels stuck”. So if they aren’t finding value at that time, they are able to be redirected to the most valuable portion of the system for their use case.

SECTION B — Database tables that overlap
B1. Five tables for student journey
Plain English: A "student journey" is one concept (the path a student takes through your program). But it's stored in five separate tables in the database: activities, entries, milestones, progress, progress history. That's like keeping one student's report card in five different filing cabinets, and every time you want to see the whole picture you have to open all five.
Why it matters: Slow queries. Hard to keep them in sync. New developers can't figure out where to save what. Almost certainly some of these can be combined.
My take: Worth a focused review — probably 2-3 tables can fold into one. But it's a real database migration so it's risky and needs careful planning.
Your answer: Yes. We need these folded into one. I think the big deal is that we need this solved in an enterprise software fashion vs a small app company solution. So think BIG!!! Imagine how we can track a single student across countries and state lines. Even across town. We need to make sure the student journey is in as few tables as possible but trackable so we do not have duplicate students or that we can verify who is who.

B2. Profile information stored in multiple places
Plain English: Things like a teacher's country, state, and what grade levels they teach are stored in more than one table. Specifically the architect flagged the users table, the user_preferences table, AND the educator_profiles table all hold some of these fields.
Why it matters: When a teacher updates their state, which copy gets updated? If the code only updates one, the others go stale and now your reports show wrong locations. Classic bug source.
My take: Risky to fix because it's a migration (moving data from one home to another) but high value. Pick one place per field and stick with it.
Your answer: 1. The "Where" (Defining the Home)
Tell the developers to move all demographic and professional data strictly to the educator_profiles (or general profiles) table.
users table: STRICTLY for Authentication and RBAC (ID, email, password_hash, role, created_at). Remove country and state from here.
user_preferences table: STRICTLY for UI/App settings (dark mode, email notification frequency, language selection). Remove grade levels and location from here.
educator_profiles table: THE SINGLE SOURCE OF TRUTH for country, state, grade_levels_taught, and school_district.
2. The "How" (The Safe 4-Step Migration)
Because migrations are risky, tell the devs not to just "delete the old columns" immediately. They should use a Phased Migration Strategy:
Step 1: Schema Update: Add country, state, and grade_levels to educator_profiles if they aren't there already.
Step 2: The Data Backfill (Migration Script): Write a SQL script that copies the existing data from users and user_preferences into educator_profiles.
Conflict Rule: If the state in users differs from the state in user_preferences, tell the script to pick the one with the most recent updated_at timestamp.
Step 3: The Code Cutover: Refactor the backend API endpoints (Next.js/Node.js) so that whenever a user views or edits their profile, the code only reads from and writes to educator_profiles.
Step 4: The Cleanup (Drop Columns): Once Step 3 is live and you confirm the app is working perfectly for a few days, run a final SQL migration to DROP COLUMN country, state from users and DROP COLUMN grade_levels from user_preferences.
Developer Translation: "Hey team, we are consolidating all demographic and role data into educator_profiles to prevent data drift that could break our AI standards-tagging and dynamic pricing. Please write a backfill script to migrate existing data, point all API reads/writes to educator_profiles, and then drop the redundant columns from users and user_preferences."



B3. Seven parent-related tables
Plain English: The "parent" feature in your app touches seven separate tables: consents, broadcast posts, invitations, messages, message threads, notification preferences, progress notes, and parent-student links. Each table on its own makes sense — but the parent feature has clearly grown messily over time.
Why it matters: Probably not broken, just sprawling. Risk is that the next parent feature adds an 8th and 9th table when it should reuse what's there.
My take: Don't merge them, but write a short "here's how the parent feature is laid out" doc so the next person doesn't add more.
Your answer: The Parent Feature Ecosystem
To All Developers: The "Parent/Guardian" feature in the LYS platform currently spans 8 distinct tables. This is by design to separate relationships, compliance, and communication.
🚨 THE GOLDEN RULE: Do not create a new parent-related table. If a new parent feature is requested, you must first attempt to integrate it into one of these existing domains (via a new column, an enum update, or a JSONB metadata field).
1. The Core Relationship (The Anchor)
Everything starts here. A user is not a "parent" to a student until this link exists.
parent_student_links
Purpose: Maps the many-to-many relationship between a Parent account and a Student account.
Use For: Verifying access rights. (e.g., Does User A have permission to view Student B's Success metrics?)
2. Access & Compliance (The Gates)
Because we deal with COPPA/FERPA, onboarding and legal permission have their own dedicated tables.
invitations
Purpose: Handles the onboarding lifecycle. Tracks when a teacher/student invites a parent to the platform, the unique token, and whether it was accepted, expired, or revoked.
consents
Purpose: The legal ledger. Tracks COPPA age-gate approvals, terms of service agreements, and permissions for the student to use the "Safety Suite" messaging tools.
3. Communication (The Safety Suite)
We separate 1-to-1 messaging from 1-to-Many announcements for data archiving and auditing purposes.
message_threads & messages
Purpose: Handles direct, two-way communication (e.g., Parent $\leftrightarrow$ Teacher or Parent $\leftrightarrow$ Mentor).
Use For: Any feature requiring back-and-forth dialogue or the "Review Queue" approval process.
broadcast_posts
Purpose: One-way, 1-to-Many announcements (e.g., District Admin $\rightarrow$ All Parents, or Teacher $\rightarrow$ Class Parents).
Use For: Newsletters, system alerts, or general class updates.
4. Monitoring & Settings (The Experience)
How parents consume data and how they interact with the "Success" tracking.
progress_notes
Purpose: Stores the qualitative feedback attached to a student's "Success / Not Yet" marks.
Use For: Whenever a parent needs to view teacher feedback, dispute a mark, or leave an encouraging note for the student's portfolio.
notification_preferences
Purpose: Stores the parent's opt-ins (SMS vs. Email, frequency of updates, push notifications).
Use For: Routing logic. Check this table before firing any automated email/SMS to a parent.
How to Handle Future Feature Requests
If a product manager asks for a new feature, map it to the existing structure:
Request: "Parents need to approve a field trip." $\rightarrow$ Add a new type enum to the consents table. Do not build a field_trip_approvals table.
Request: "Parents need to get an alert when a grade drops." $\rightarrow$ Add a trigger flag to notification_preferences and pull from the student's Success data. Do not build a parent_alerts table.



B4. Two different "storage" files in the server code
Plain English: I noticed there are two files both named storage — the big main one (server/storage.ts, 9,690 lines) and a tiny one (server/replit_integrations/auth/storage.ts, 110 lines). The little one only handles the Replit login system and lives next to the other Replit-login code. That's actually correct.
My take: Leave alone. Looks bad on a list, but it's right.
Your answer: Ok. Let’s leave it alone.

SECTION C — Files that are way too big
C1. routes.ts — 15,510 lines
Plain English: Imagine your school had one filing cabinet that held every single document — student records, payroll, lunch menus, fire drill plans, board meeting notes — all crammed together with no labels. That's what routes.ts is. It's the file that defines every single way the website can be talked to (every button click, every page load, every API request — 578 of them).
Why it matters: Anybody who touches it has to scroll through 15,000 lines to find the right spot. Two developers editing it at the same time will collide. Hard to test. Hard to onboard new devs.
The fix: Split it into ~10-15 smaller files by topic — routes/lessons.ts, routes/admin.ts, routes/parent.ts, routes/payments.ts, etc. The behavior of the website doesn't change at all; just the filing system gets organized.
Effort: Half a day, careful work. Risk: Low if done methodically. Payoff: Forever.
Your answer: To solve this, we should implement a Router Aggregation Pattern. Instead of one file holding every logic block, routes.ts becomes a "clean" entry point that simply directs traffic to specialized "sub-routers."
Here is the technical execution plan and an update to our documentation to ensure the developers don't recreate the mess.
1. The Strategy: "The Grand Central Station"
We will turn the main routes.ts into a dispatch hub. It will look like this:
/api/lessons/* $\rightarrow$ routes/lessons.ts
/api/parents/* $\rightarrow$ routes/parent.ts
/api/auth/* $\rightarrow$ routes/auth.ts
2. Implementation Steps
Create the Directory: Create a new folder at src/routes/.
The Extraction: Identify the 10-15 logical domains (Lessons, Auth, Parents, Admin, Payments, Authors, Profile, Students, etc.).
The Move: For each domain, create a file (e.g., parent.ts), export a Router instance from Express/NestJS, and move the relevant 40-50 routes there.
The Hook-up: In the main routes.ts, import these sub-routers and mount them.
Update the Feature Data Architecture document sto include the specific routing logic for that domain, setting the standard for the rest of the refactor.
Instructions for the Developer:
"Team, we are cleaning up the 15k-line routes.ts file. Do not add any more code to the root file. Instead create a new folder src/routes/ and migrated the Parent logic to src/routes/parent.ts as a template. Then do others in a similar fashion. Please continue this for the Lessons, Admin, and Payments domains today. The goal is to get routes.ts down under 500 lines asap."



C2. storage.ts — 9,690 lines
Plain English: Same problem as C1, just for the file that talks to the database. One giant file that holds every "save this," "load that," "find these" function in the whole app.
The fix: Same as C1 — split by topic.
Your take: Usually fix C1 and C2 in the same pass.
Your answer: Split this up as we did the previous question’s answer.

C3. SystemAdmin.tsx — 5,692 lines
Plain English: Your top-level admin control panel is one giant file. It has a row of tabs across the top — users, lessons, payments, audit logs, etc. Each tab's contents lives inside this one file. The fix is to put each tab in its own file.
Effort: A few hours. Risk: Low. Payoff: Anyone editing one tab can't accidentally break another tab.
Your answer: Ok. Update it as needed so it is efficient and effective.

C4. schema.ts — 3,752 lines (the database blueprint)
Plain English: This is the file that describes the shape of every single one of your 114 database tables. It's big but it's not really a problem because the system that reads it (Drizzle) is happy with one big file. Splitting it is optional and mostly cosmetic.
My take: Skip unless you're already in there for another reason.
Your answer: Ok. Let’s skip this, unless there is a way to make it more efficient and effective.

SECTION D — Same job done three different ways
D1. Database access: storage interface vs direct database calls
Plain English: When a route needs to fetch something from the database, sometimes it asks the "storage" middleman (the right way), and sometimes it talks to the database directly (the shortcut). Some files do one, some do the other, some do both in the same file.
Why it matters: Two patterns means every new dev has to learn both. Bugs hide because changes to the middleman don't affect the shortcuts. Pick one.
The fix: Decide "always use storage" (slower but safer) or "always use direct" (faster but skips validation). Then sweep through and convert everything to the chosen pattern.
My recommendation: Always use storage. That's why it exists.
Your answer: For an app like LYS—where we are dealing with high-stakes data like IEP compliance, Global Parity Pricing, and Tenant Isolation—the "shortcut" (direct database calls) is actually a massive liability.
If a developer writes a direct SQL query and forgets to include the WHERE tenant_id = XYZ clause, they’ve just created a cross-tenant data leak.
The Decision: "Always Use Storage" (The Interface Pattern)
We must mandate the Storage Interface (The "Storage Middleman"). While it feels slightly slower to write initially, it is the only way to guarantee that our Row Level Security (RLS) and Safety Suite logic are applied every single time.
The Fix: "The Storage Gatekeeper"
I have updated the Developer Execution Plan to include this as a non-negotiable coding standard. This ensures that as we scale our 1099 team, everyone is playing by the same rules.
Talking to the Developers (The "Why")
When you hand this to the team, explain it like this:
"Team, we’ve found that our data access patterns are split between 'direct' and 'storage interface.' This is a security risk. Because we are handling IEPs and sensitive student data, we can't afford a single missing 'WHERE' clause.
Effective immediately: The Database is a Black Box. You do not talk to it directly from the routes. You ask the Storage middleman for what you need. If the Storage layer doesn't have a method for your specific query, build the method in storage.ts first, include the mandatory tenant_id validation there, and then call it from your route."
By enforcing this, you make the app "Secure by Default." Even a junior dev can't accidentally leak data if the only tool they are allowed to use (the Storage Interface) has the security built into it.



D2. Some pages skip the cache and just ask the server every time
Plain English: The app has a smart cache — if a page already fetched the user list 3 seconds ago, asking again should be instant from memory. Most pages use this cache (called react-query). But a few pages (Site Admin, Classroom, Dashboard per the architect) skip the cache and ask the server fresh every time the page loads. Slower for the user, more work for the server.
The fix: Convert those pages to use react-query like everyone else.
Your answer:Yes, let’s go with your recommendation.

D3. Forms — some use the validator library, some don't
Plain English: When a user fills out a form, the app needs to check that the email is a real email, the phone number is a real phone number, etc. There's a great library that does this automatically (called zodResolver). Most forms use it. A few (like the Educator Profile form) wrote their own checking by hand. The hand-written ones are inconsistent and miss edge cases.
The fix: Convert the holdouts to use zodResolver.
Your answer: Yes. Let’s do this.

D4. Error messages have inconsistent shapes
Plain English: When something goes wrong, the server sends back an error message. Sometimes it's labeled error, sometimes message, sometimes it's just a raw string. The pop-up that shows the error to the user has to handle all three shapes, and sometimes it shows a blank pop-up because the shape didn't match.
The fix: Pick one shape (e.g. always { error: "human readable message" }) and convert all the routes.
Your answer: Good plan. Let’s do that.

SECTION E — Performance
E1. Some "give me the list" endpoints return everything at once
Plain English: A few endpoints (like "give me all lessons" or "give me all parent message threads") return EVERY result, no matter how many. With 50 lessons that's fine. With 50,000 lessons that's a 30-second page load and a server crash.
The fix: Add pagination — return 50 at a time with a "next page" button. Standard practice.
Why now: Cheap to do today. Painful to do after you have lots of data.
Your answer: Yes. Let’s search the system and add this everywhere it is possibly needed.

E2. Probable N+1 problem on admin lists (needs measuring)
Plain English: "N+1" is a famous performance bug. Imagine you ask "give me all 100 students," then for each student you go ask separately "what's their organization name?" — that's 1 query for the list + 100 separate queries = 101 round trips. The right way is to ask once: "give me all students with their org names already attached."
The architect suspects this is happening on some admin pages. I haven't measured it. If true, those pages are 10-100x slower than they need to be.
The fix: Measure first, then fix the offenders.
Your answer: The architect is identifying a major performance bottleneck that usually hides in plain sight until the user count grows. In our context of LYS—especially for Tier 4 District Admins who might be looking at a list of 5,000 students across 20 campuses—an N+1 bug is the difference between a page loading in 200ms or 20 seconds.
Our developer_execution_plan.md should mandate a Storage Interface, this fix becomes much easier to implement and enforce.
1. The Strategy: "The Join Over the Loop"
We need to stop the "loop-and-fetch" pattern in our code.
The Bad Way (N+1):
const students = Storage.getAllStudents(tenantId); (1 query)
students.map(s => s.org = Storage.getOrgById(s.orgId)); (100 queries for 100 students)
The Right Way (Eager Loading):
const students = Storage.getAllStudentsWithOrgs(tenantId); (1 query using a SQL JOIN or IN clause).
2. The Implementation Plan
Update the Developer Execution Plan with a specific section on performance and "Eager Loading" to ensure this doesn't happen.
How to talk to the Developer about this:
You can use this exact script to keep it professional but firm:
"Hey team, we need to do a performance audit on the Admin dashboards. The architect is concerned about N+1 query issues. Specifically, check the logic where we list students or 'Bricks'—ensure we aren't hitting the database for every individual row's metadata.
Check your Storage methods. If you see a loop that calls a database function, refactor it into a single SQL JOIN. We need these pages to stay lightning-fast as we onboard those first 50 Author Academy teachers and their classes."



E3. Big pages slow down first load (lazy loading)
Plain English: Right now, when a user opens your app, the browser downloads the code for every page — even pages they'll never visit. So a parent visiting the parent portal still downloads the System Admin page (5,692 lines of code they don't need).
The fix: Mark each page as "load only when needed" (the technical term is "lazy loading" or "code splitting"). The first page load gets noticeably faster, especially for users on slow internet.
Effort: ~30 minutes. Risk: Very low. Payoff: Faster app for everyone, especially in West Africa where connections may be slower.
My take: This is the highest "bang for buck" item on the whole list.
Your answer: Great answer. Let’s go that route that you suggested.

SECTION F — The 182 "maybe orphan" routes
Plain English: Your server defines 457 ways the website can be talked to. My quick scan found that 182 of them don't seem to be called by any front-end code. BUT — and this is important — my scan is dumb. It missed obvious ones like the Foundation admin route I just built (which IS used). So that "182" number is wildly inflated by false positives. The true number is probably 30-60, but figuring out which is which means going one-by-one.
The fix: Don't bulk delete. Schedule a focused half-day where I review each one carefully, confirm nothing in production calls it, then delete.
Risk if you skip: Server file stays bloated, but nothing breaks.
Your answer: As your Organizational Change Leader, I’m going to advise against a "Delete-All" spree. That’s how you accidentally break a "Forgot Password" link or a niche admin tool right before a big demo. However, as your CMO, I want a clean, fast app that doesn't have a massive attack surface for hackers to probe.
Here is the "Orphan Route Protocol" I’ve added to the Developer Execution Plan. It turns this from a scary guessing game into a disciplined, low-risk cleanup.
How to handle this with the dev team:
The "Surgical Fix" I outlined above is the most "human" way to tell a developer to clean up. Tell them:
"I know we have a list of 182 potential orphan routes. I'm not asking you to delete them all today—that’s too risky. Instead, let's put a simple 'Check-In' logger on those specific routes for the next 72 hours. If a route stays silent for three days while we are testing, it's a prime candidate for the chopping block. Let's get that server lean before the August launch."
Why this is a Change Leadership win:
Psychological Safety: You aren't blaming the devs for "messy code"; you're acknowledging that the app has grown and it's time for a "spring cleaning."
Data-Driven: You aren't guessing what is used; you're measuring it.
Security: Every orphan route is a potential "unlocked door." Closing them is a major security win for our FERPA/NDPR compliance.



MY RECOMMENDED ORDER
If you want a "just do these, in this order" list:
A1 (decide which Resources page is real) — 5 minutes of your time, then I do 1-2 hours
E3 (lazy loading) — 30 minutes of my time, biggest user-visible win
C1 + C2 (split the giant routes/storage files) — half-day, makes everything else easier
D1 + D2 (pick one db-access pattern, kill raw fetch) — pairs naturally with #3
E1 (add pagination) — 1-2 hours, future-proofs scale
A3 / A4 (admin dashboard sharing, onboarding source-of-truth) — when you have the appetite
B1 / B2 (database table cleanups) — schedule deliberately, these are real migrations
F (orphan route cleanup) — half-day, scheduled
Your overall pick / order: Go ahead an fix it in the order you recommended unless my answers change things.