SECTION C — Files that are way too big
C1. routes.ts — 15,510 lines
Plain English: Imagine your school had one filing cabinet that held every single document — student records, payroll, lunch menus, fire drill plans, board meeting notes — all crammed together with no labels. That's what routes.ts is. It's the file that defines every single way the website can be talked to (every button click, every page load, every API request — 578 of them).
Why it matters: Anybody who touches it has to scroll through 15,000 lines to find the right spot. Two developers editing it at the same time will collide. Hard to test. Hard to onboard new devs.
The fix: Split it into ~10-15 smaller files by topic — routes/lessons.ts, routes/admin.ts, routes/parent.ts, routes/payments.ts, etc. The behavior of the website doesn't change at all; just the filing system gets organized.
Effort: Half a day, careful work. Risk: Low if done methodically. Payoff: Forever.
Your answer: To solve this, we should implement a Router Aggregation Pattern. Instead of one file holding every logic block, routes.ts becomes a "clean" entry point that simply directs traffic to specialized "sub-routers."
Here is the technical execution plan and an update to our documentation to ensure the developers don't recreate the mess.
1. The Strategy: "The Grand Central Station"
We will turn the main routes.ts into a dispatch hub. It will look like this:
/api/lessons/* $\rightarrow$ routes/lessons.ts
/api/parents/* $\rightarrow$ routes/parent.ts
/api/auth/* $\rightarrow$ routes/auth.ts
2. Implementation Steps
Create the Directory: Create a new folder at src/routes/.
The Extraction: Identify the 10-15 logical domains (Lessons, Auth, Parents, Admin, Payments, Authors, Profile, Students, etc.).
The Move: For each domain, create a file (e.g., parent.ts), export a Router instance from Express/NestJS, and move the relevant 40-50 routes there.
The Hook-up: In the main routes.ts, import these sub-routers and mount them.
Update the Feature Data Architecture document sto include the specific routing logic for that domain, setting the standard for the rest of the refactor.
Instructions for the Developer:
"Team, we are cleaning up the 15k-line routes.ts file. Do not add any more code to the root file. Instead create a new folder src/routes/ and migrated the Parent logic to src/routes/parent.ts as a template. Then do others in a similar fashion. Please continue this for the Lessons, Admin, and Payments domains today. The goal is to get routes.ts down under 500 lines asap."



C2. storage.ts — 9,690 lines
Plain English: Same problem as C1, just for the file that talks to the database. One giant file that holds every "save this," "load that," "find these" function in the whole app.
The fix: Same as C1 — split by topic.
Your take: Usually fix C1 and C2 in the same pass.
Your answer: Split this up as we did the previous question’s answer.

C3. SystemAdmin.tsx — 5,692 lines
Plain English: Your top-level admin control panel is one giant file. It has a row of tabs across the top — users, lessons, payments, audit logs, etc. Each tab's contents lives inside this one file. The fix is to put each tab in its own file.
Effort: A few hours. Risk: Low. Payoff: Anyone editing one tab can't accidentally break another tab.
Your answer: Ok. Update it as needed so it is efficient and effective.

C4. schema.ts — 3,752 lines (the database blueprint)
Plain English: This is the file that describes the shape of every single one of your 114 database tables. It's big but it's not really a problem because the system that reads it (Drizzle) is happy with one big file. Splitting it is optional and mostly cosmetic.
My take: Skip unless you're already in there for another reason.
Your answer: Ok. Let’s skip this, unless there is a way to make it more efficient and effective.

SECTION D — Same job done three different ways
D1. Database access: storage interface vs direct database calls
Plain English: When a route needs to fetch something from the database, sometimes it asks the "storage" middleman (the right way), and sometimes it talks to the database directly (the shortcut). Some files do one, some do the other, some do both in the same file.
Why it matters: Two patterns means every new dev has to learn both. Bugs hide because changes to the middleman don't affect the shortcuts. Pick one.
The fix: Decide "always use storage" (slower but safer) or "always use direct" (faster but skips validation). Then sweep through and convert everything to the chosen pattern.
My recommendation: Always use storage. That's why it exists.
Your answer: For an app like LYS—where we are dealing with high-stakes data like IEP compliance, Global Parity Pricing, and Tenant Isolation—the "shortcut" (direct database calls) is actually a massive liability.
If a developer writes a direct SQL query and forgets to include the WHERE tenant_id = XYZ clause, they’ve just created a cross-tenant data leak.
The Decision: "Always Use Storage" (The Interface Pattern)
We must mandate the Storage Interface (The "Storage Middleman"). While it feels slightly slower to write initially, it is the only way to guarantee that our Row Level Security (RLS) and Safety Suite logic are applied every single time.
The Fix: "The Storage Gatekeeper"
I have updated the Developer Execution Plan to include this as a non-negotiable coding standard. This ensures that as we scale our 1099 team, everyone is playing by the same rules.
Talking to the Developers (The "Why")
When you hand this to the team, explain it like this:
"Team, we’ve found that our data access patterns are split between 'direct' and 'storage interface.' This is a security risk. Because we are handling IEPs and sensitive student data, we can't afford a single missing 'WHERE' clause.
Effective immediately: The Database is a Black Box. You do not talk to it directly from the routes. You ask the Storage middleman for what you need. If the Storage layer doesn't have a method for your specific query, build the method in storage.ts first, include the mandatory tenant_id validation there, and then call it from your route."
By enforcing this, you make the app "Secure by Default." Even a junior dev can't accidentally leak data if the only tool they are allowed to use (the Storage Interface) has the security built into it.



D2. Some pages skip the cache and just ask the server every time
Plain English: The app has a smart cache — if a page already fetched the user list 3 seconds ago, asking again should be instant from memory. Most pages use this cache (called react-query). But a few pages (Site Admin, Classroom, Dashboard per the architect) skip the cache and ask the server fresh every time the page loads. Slower for the user, more work for the server.
The fix: Convert those pages to use react-query like everyone else.
Your answer:Yes, let’s go with your recommendation.

D3. Forms — some use the validator library, some don't
Plain English: When a user fills out a form, the app needs to check that the email is a real email, the phone number is a real phone number, etc. There's a great library that does this automatically (called zodResolver). Most forms use it. A few (like the Educator Profile form) wrote their own checking by hand. The hand-written ones are inconsistent and miss edge cases.
The fix: Convert the holdouts to use zodResolver.
Your answer: Yes. Let’s do this.

D4. Error messages have inconsistent shapes
Plain English: When something goes wrong, the server sends back an error message. Sometimes it's labeled error, sometimes message, sometimes it's just a raw string. The pop-up that shows the error to the user has to handle all three shapes, and sometimes it shows a blank pop-up because the shape didn't match.
The fix: Pick one shape (e.g. always { error: "human readable message" }) and convert all the routes.
Your answer: Good plan. Let’s do that.

SECTION E — Performance
E1. Some "give me the list" endpoints return everything at once
Plain English: A few endpoints (like "give me all lessons" or "give me all parent message threads") return EVERY result, no matter how many. With 50 lessons that's fine. With 50,000 lessons that's a 30-second page load and a server crash.
The fix: Add pagination — return 50 at a time with a "next page" button. Standard practice.
Why now: Cheap to do today. Painful to do after you have lots of data.
Your answer: Yes. Let’s search the system and add this everywhere it is possibly needed.

E2. Probable N+1 problem on admin lists (needs measuring)
Plain English: "N+1" is a famous performance bug. Imagine you ask "give me all 100 students," then for each student you go ask separately "what's their organization name?" — that's 1 query for the list + 100 separate queries = 101 round trips. The right way is to ask once: "give me all students with their org names already attached."
The architect suspects this is happening on some admin pages. I haven't measured it. If true, those pages are 10-100x slower than they need to be.
The fix: Measure first, then fix the offenders.
Your answer: The architect is identifying a major performance bottleneck that usually hides in plain sight until the user count grows. In our context of LYS—especially for Tier 4 District Admins who might be looking at a list of 5,000 students across 20 campuses—an N+1 bug is the difference between a page loading in 200ms or 20 seconds.
Our developer_execution_plan.md should mandate a Storage Interface, this fix becomes much easier to implement and enforce.
1. The Strategy: "The Join Over the Loop"
We need to stop the "loop-and-fetch" pattern in our code.
The Bad Way (N+1):
const students = Storage.getAllStudents(tenantId); (1 query)
students.map(s => s.org = Storage.getOrgById(s.orgId)); (100 queries for 100 students)
The Right Way (Eager Loading):
const students = Storage.getAllStudentsWithOrgs(tenantId); (1 query using a SQL JOIN or IN clause).
2. The Implementation Plan
Update the Developer Execution Plan with a specific section on performance and "Eager Loading" to ensure this doesn't happen.
How to talk to the Developer about this:
You can use this exact script to keep it professional but firm:
"Hey team, we need to do a performance audit on the Admin dashboards. The architect is concerned about N+1 query issues. Specifically, check the logic where we list students or 'Bricks'—ensure we aren't hitting the database for every individual row's metadata.
Check your Storage methods. If you see a loop that calls a database function, refactor it into a single SQL JOIN. We need these pages to stay lightning-fast as we onboard those first 50 Author Academy teachers and their classes."



E3. Big pages slow down first load (lazy loading)
Plain English: Right now, when a user opens your app, the browser downloads the code for every page — even pages they'll never visit. So a parent visiting the parent portal still downloads the System Admin page (5,692 lines of code they don't need).
The fix: Mark each page as "load only when needed" (the technical term is "lazy loading" or "code splitting"). The first page load gets noticeably faster, especially for users on slow internet.
Effort: ~30 minutes. Risk: Very low. Payoff: Faster app for everyone, especially in West Africa where connections may be slower.
My take: This is the highest "bang for buck" item on the whole list.
Your answer: Great answer. Let’s go that route that you suggested.

SECTION F — The 182 "maybe orphan" routes
Plain English: Your server defines 457 ways the website can be talked to. My quick scan found that 182 of them don't seem to be called by any front-end code. BUT — and this is important — my scan is dumb. It missed obvious ones like the Foundation admin route I just built (which IS used). So that "182" number is wildly inflated by false positives. The true number is probably 30-60, but figuring out which is which means going one-by-one.
The fix: Don't bulk delete. Schedule a focused half-day where I review each one carefully, confirm nothing in production calls it, then delete.
Risk if you skip: Server file stays bloated, but nothing breaks.
Your answer: As your Organizational Change Leader, I’m going to advise against a "Delete-All" spree. That’s how you accidentally break a "Forgot Password" link or a niche admin tool right before a big demo. However, as your CMO, I want a clean, fast app that doesn't have a massive attack surface for hackers to probe.
Here is the "Orphan Route Protocol" I’ve added to the Developer Execution Plan. It turns this from a scary guessing game into a disciplined, low-risk cleanup.
How to handle this with the dev team:
The "Surgical Fix" I outlined above is the most "human" way to tell a developer to clean up. Tell them:
"I know we have a list of 182 potential orphan routes. I'm not asking you to delete them all today—that’s too risky. Instead, let's put a simple 'Check-In' logger on those specific routes for the next 72 hours. If a route stays silent for three days while we are testing, it's a prime candidate for the chopping block. Let's get that server lean before the August launch."
Why this is a Change Leadership win:
Psychological Safety: You aren't blaming the devs for "messy code"; you're acknowledging that the app has grown and it's time for a "spring cleaning."
Data-Driven: You aren't guessing what is used; you're measuring it.
Security: Every orphan route is a potential "unlocked door." Closing them is a major security win for our FERPA/NDPR compliance.



MY RECOMMENDED ORDER
If you want a "just do these, in this order" list:
A1 (decide which Resources page is real) — 5 minutes of your time, then I do 1-2 hours
E3 (lazy loading) — 30 minutes of my time, biggest user-visible win
C1 + C2 (split the giant routes/storage files) — half-day, makes everything else easier
D1 + D2 (pick one db-access pattern, kill raw fetch) — pairs naturally with #3
E1 (add pagination) — 1-2 hours, future-proofs scale
A3 / A4 (admin dashboard sharing, onboarding source-of-truth) — when you have the appetite
B1 / B2 (database table cleanups) — schedule deliberately, these are real migrations
F (orphan route cleanup) — half-day, scheduled
Your overall pick / order: Go ahead an fix it in the order you recommended unless my answers change things.