SECTION E — Performance
E1. Some "give me the list" endpoints return everything at once
Plain English: A few endpoints (like "give me all lessons" or "give me all parent message threads") return EVERY result, no matter how many. With 50 lessons that's fine. With 50,000 lessons that's a 30-second page load and a server crash.
The fix: Add pagination — return 50 at a time with a "next page" button. Standard practice.
Why now: Cheap to do today. Painful to do after you have lots of data.
Your answer: Yes. Let’s search the system and add this everywhere it is possibly needed.

E2. Probable N+1 problem on admin lists (needs measuring)
Plain English: "N+1" is a famous performance bug. Imagine you ask "give me all 100 students," then for each student you go ask separately "what's their organization name?" — that's 1 query for the list + 100 separate queries = 101 round trips. The right way is to ask once: "give me all students with their org names already attached."
The architect suspects this is happening on some admin pages. I haven't measured it. If true, those pages are 10-100x slower than they need to be.
The fix: Measure first, then fix the offenders.
Your answer: The architect is identifying a major performance bottleneck that usually hides in plain sight until the user count grows. In our context of LYS—especially for Tier 4 District Admins who might be looking at a list of 5,000 students across 20 campuses—an N+1 bug is the difference between a page loading in 200ms or 20 seconds.
Our developer_execution_plan.md should mandate a Storage Interface, this fix becomes much easier to implement and enforce.
1. The Strategy: "The Join Over the Loop"
We need to stop the "loop-and-fetch" pattern in our code.
The Bad Way (N+1):
const students = Storage.getAllStudents(tenantId); (1 query)
students.map(s => s.org = Storage.getOrgById(s.orgId)); (100 queries for 100 students)
The Right Way (Eager Loading):
const students = Storage.getAllStudentsWithOrgs(tenantId); (1 query using a SQL JOIN or IN clause).
2. The Implementation Plan
Update the Developer Execution Plan with a specific section on performance and "Eager Loading" to ensure this doesn't happen.
How to talk to the Developer about this:
You can use this exact script to keep it professional but firm:
"Hey team, we need to do a performance audit on the Admin dashboards. The architect is concerned about N+1 query issues. Specifically, check the logic where we list students or 'Bricks'—ensure we aren't hitting the database for every individual row's metadata.
Check your Storage methods. If you see a loop that calls a database function, refactor it into a single SQL JOIN. We need these pages to stay lightning-fast as we onboard those first 50 Author Academy teachers and their classes."



E3. Big pages slow down first load (lazy loading)
Plain English: Right now, when a user opens your app, the browser downloads the code for every page — even pages they'll never visit. So a parent visiting the parent portal still downloads the System Admin page (5,692 lines of code they don't need).
The fix: Mark each page as "load only when needed" (the technical term is "lazy loading" or "code splitting"). The first page load gets noticeably faster, especially for users on slow internet.
Effort: ~30 minutes. Risk: Very low. Payoff: Faster app for everyone, especially in West Africa where connections may be slower.
My take: This is the highest "bang for buck" item on the whole list.
Your answer: Great answer. Let’s go that route that you suggested.

SECTION F — The 182 "maybe orphan" routes
Plain English: Your server defines 457 ways the website can be talked to. My quick scan found that 182 of them don't seem to be called by any front-end code. BUT — and this is important — my scan is dumb. It missed obvious ones like the Foundation admin route I just built (which IS used). So that "182" number is wildly inflated by false positives. The true number is probably 30-60, but figuring out which is which means going one-by-one.
The fix: Don't bulk delete. Schedule a focused half-day where I review each one carefully, confirm nothing in production calls it, then delete.
Risk if you skip: Server file stays bloated, but nothing breaks.
Your answer: As your Organizational Change Leader, I’m going to advise against a "Delete-All" spree. That’s how you accidentally break a "Forgot Password" link or a niche admin tool right before a big demo. However, as your CMO, I want a clean, fast app that doesn't have a massive attack surface for hackers to probe.
Here is the "Orphan Route Protocol" I’ve added to the Developer Execution Plan. It turns this from a scary guessing game into a disciplined, low-risk cleanup.
How to handle this with the dev team:
The "Surgical Fix" I outlined above is the most "human" way to tell a developer to clean up. Tell them:
"I know we have a list of 182 potential orphan routes. I'm not asking you to delete them all today—that’s too risky. Instead, let's put a simple 'Check-In' logger on those specific routes for the next 72 hours. If a route stays silent for three days while we are testing, it's a prime candidate for the chopping block. Let's get that server lean before the August launch."
Why this is a Change Leadership win:
Psychological Safety: You aren't blaming the devs for "messy code"; you're acknowledging that the app has grown and it's time for a "spring cleaning."
Data-Driven: You aren't guessing what is used; you're measuring it.
Security: Every orphan route is a potential "unlocked door." Closing them is a major security win for our FERPA/NDPR compliance.



MY RECOMMENDED ORDER
If you want a "just do these, in this order" list:
A1 (decide which Resources page is real) — 5 minutes of your time, then I do 1-2 hours
E3 (lazy loading) — 30 minutes of my time, biggest user-visible win
C1 + C2 (split the giant routes/storage files) — half-day, makes everything else easier
D1 + D2 (pick one db-access pattern, kill raw fetch) — pairs naturally with #3
E1 (add pagination) — 1-2 hours, future-proofs scale
A3 / A4 (admin dashboard sharing, onboarding source-of-truth) — when you have the appetite
B1 / B2 (database table cleanups) — schedule deliberately, these are real migrations
F (orphan route cleanup) — half-day, scheduled
Your overall pick / order: Go ahead an fix it in the order you recommended unless my answers change things.